What can Kinto do for me?
#########################

:date: 2015-12-26
:slug: what-can-kinto-do-for-you
:lang: en
:url: what-can-kinto-do-for-you
:summary: Kinto, the project we are working on, can do a bunch of different
          things, but it's sometimes hard to see what it is really good at,
          and where it would make sense to use other solutions.

Kinto — the project we are working on since quite some time now — can do a bunch
of different things for you and be useful in many different situations.

However we found out that it is really hard to understand at a glance what it
can do, and where it could help you build your projects in a better way.

Here is an attempt to fix this.


Kinto is not a framework
########################

First and foremost, Kinto is not a framework. Kinto is meant to replace the
storage layer of your application, or more accurately, the synchronisation
abilities of your applications.

Said differentely, you store your data locally for your application and Kinto
will make this data available to different devices. That means that you can use
Kinto with React, Angular, JQuery (in the JavaScript world) or any framework in
any language. Kinto abstracts the synchronisation of the application's data.

Some examples
#############

Let's take some examples. A few weeks ago we prepared a bunch of demos
showcasing what Kinto can do and how easy it is. In order to do that, we
decided to take a few applications we liked that are usually not doing
synchronisation and sharing. There are many out there, and we chose just a few of
them:

- **A JQuery calendar application** which let you add new events and see them
  on a calendar.
- **A leaflet map** where you can add new markers and move them easily.
- **A TODO-list application**, because we actually really like TODO lists.

And then we decided to make them collaborative apps, using Kinto. The goal here
was to spend the least time possible plugging in Kinto, in order to see what was
the real potential of it.

We ended-up with a few cool demos. Not all of them are using the same features
of Kinto (for instance some take advantage of the push notifications while some
others don't), but overall that was pretty exciting.

Here are some links if you want to try out the demos yourself:

* `Kinto.js + Leaflet <http://leplatrem.github.io/kinto-demo-leaflet/>`_
  with offline-first maps which requires service workers activated
  (only works in Firefox Nightly these days).
* `Kinto.js + Leaflet + Pusher <http://leplatrem.github.io/cliquet-pusher/>`_
  with realtime multi device map markers synchronisation using Pusher.
* `Kinto.js + fullCalendar <http://leplatrem.github.io/kinto-demo-calendar/>`_
  with realtime multi device synchronisation using Pusher and Firefox Account integration.
* `Kinto.js + Telegram Bot + Pusher <http://leplatrem.github.io/kinto-telegram-wall/>`_
  a realtime wall. That receive message from a Telegram bot and automatically update the
  slideshow in realtime to add new content to the slideshow.


Hmm, and what about my use-case?
################################

The idea here is mainly to show you what is already possible with very little
efforts using the tooling we have put together. These examples are all relying
on the `Kinto.js <https://kintojs.readthedocs.org>`_ client but ultimately you don't
need it. It's just here to make it really easy for you to integrate with the
HTTP APIs exposed by Kinto.

So, what Kinto can do for you?


Synchronise
===========

If there was one only thing to choose, that would be this one. Kinto can
**synchronise** your data between different devices. You have the data on one
location, and you want it in a different one.


Storage
=======

As a bonus, you get this data stored somewhere so you can access it later on.

The cool thing with this is that you can access this data using an HTTP (REST)
API, that speaks JSON. We tried very hard to make the protocol as easy as
possible, and to be honest we're pretty happy with our current design.


Permissions
===========

Sometimes, you want your data to remain yours, and some other times you want to
share it with friends. It really depends what the data is. One of the reasons we
built Kinto was to control who has access to what on a per record level.


Real-time Notifications
=======================

So, what happens when the data evolves? Let's say you are on one device doing
geo-mapping and someone else is doing the same thing on their own device. You
want to have these two devices in Sync, and as such they need to know when new
data was issued by any other device.


Going further
#############

Our vision with Kinto is really to propose a simple tool for simple needs, and
to do these simple things the best way we can.

If you are interested by what Kinto has to propose, don't hesitate to
`have a look at the documentation <https://kinto.readthedocs.org>`_,
try `the Kinto.js tutorial <http://kintojs.readthedocs.org/en/latest/tutorial/>`_
and `get in touch <https://kiwiirc.com/client/irc.freenode.net/?#kinto>`_
with us, we would be very happy to discuss what your needs are and how to make
it as easy as possible for you.

Don't be shy, we are really here to help.
