Looking for an Outreachy intern this winter
###########################################

:slug: outreachy-2016
:date: 2015-10-01
:lang: en
:url: outreach-kinto-2016
:summary:
    This year we are participating to the GNOME Outreachy program with our
    Kinto project, in order to make instances discoverable. Please, join in!

.. epigraph::

  By having a program targeted specifically towards women, we found that we
  reached talented and passionate participants, who were uncertain about how to
  start otherwise.

  We are now expanding the program to people from more groups underrepresented
  in FOSS. We hope this effort will help many people learn how exciting, varied
  and valuable work on FOSS projects can be and how inclusive the community
  really is.

  -- `The GNOME Outreachy program wiki <https://wiki.gnome.org/Outreachy>`_

In our team, and at Mozilla in general, we thrive to build an inclusive
community. And we believe being more inclusive starts by reaching to the people
who are often underrepresented in tech.

That's why we are participating in the GNOME Outreachy program this year by
proposing an internship around Kinto and making instances discoverable.

Check out the eligibility details at the end of the article if you're
interested!

Making Kinto instances discoverable
===================================

The `Kinto project <https://kinto.readthedocs.org>`_ aims to bring storage
instances to everyone, attached to their
`Firefox Accounts <https://accounts.firefox.com>`_ (Well, it actually supports
multiple authentication schemes, but we want to promote Firefox Accounts as a
first step).

Currently, Kinto is thought of as a centralised server: there is one instance, and
everyone authenticates on this instance. Items are shared between users of a
same instance.

This doesn't resonate well with many of our goals: scalability is harder
when there is one endpoint, and it's also not interoperable.

For instance, imagine Alice and Bob. Bob is using Mozilla's servers to store
his data, whereas Alice deployed her own Kinto instance.

There are different use cases:

* Alice wants to use `Routina <https://github.com/leplatrem/routina>`_, an
  application that stores its data inside a Kinto instance. As such, Routina
  needs a way to discover where it should store its data, and send the requests
  to this server.
* Bob and Alice want to collaborate on a set of data (think about a webapp to
  manage their shared expenses). There should be a way for Alice to host
  everything and grant access to Bob on her data. The webapp should be able to
  use the correct server.

Here are the different steps that could allow these scenarios:

* At the moment they authenticate, the client detects the email address used,
  and relies on the domain part to do a
  `Web Finger <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7033>`_ request on the domain
  [#]_ and for the specified user.
* In case the identified server doesn't support WebFinger, it uses a central
  repository to lookup where the Kinto server is located.
* Once the Kinto server is located, all requests should be issued against this
  server.

In terms of code changes, here is what it looks like (rough step by step). The
details are still to be fleshed out - this is a rough first version:

* Update the `Kinto.js client <https://github.com/Kinto/kinto.js>`_ to find the
  server location. It should first rely on WebFinger.
* Create a central repository of server locations. This could be contained in
  the FxA profile server or in a central Kinto collection.
* Update the Kinto.js client to fall-back to this central repository in case no
  Web Finger exists.
* Investigate on ways to store this information directly in the web browser.
  It could also be configurable by the JavaScript client (with
  an UX that looks like `what Remote Storage proposes <https://remotestorage.io/>`_).
* Work on the first user experience: how can client learn they can chose which
  server to use?
* Ship it!

Want to join?
=============

So, if you think that this project is exciting and you would like to join,
please check that you:

- Identify as a woman (cis or trans), a trans man, or genderqueer person or you
  are a resident or national of the United States of any gender who is
  Black/African American, Hispanic/Latin@, American Indian, Alaska Native,
  Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander;
- Are or will be 18 years of age or older by December 7, 2015;
- Are available for a full-time, 40 hours a week internship between
  December and March.
- Think that open source software makes a difference, and would like to work
  with us on going further with making a kick-ass Kinto ecosystem;

Check the eligibility details `on the section of the GNOME wiki
<https://wiki.gnome.org/Outreachy#Program_Details>`_ and get it touch with us!

If you are not sure how to get started, the best way is to start reading `the
documentation <https://kinto.readthedocs.org>`_, especially
`the tutorials <http://kinto.readthedocs.org/en/latest/tutorials/first-steps.html>`_
and then reach out to us by joining the
`Kinto development mailing list <https://mail.mozilla.org/listinfo/kinto>`_ and
the `#storage` channel on irc.mozilla.org.

.. [#] It is also possible to use the same mechanism to discover the FxA
       endpoints. But as FxA isn't a federated protocol, users from one FxA
       realm would need to be explicitely accepted by the Kinto server, in its
       configuration.
