Discovery of Kinto servers
###########################

:slug: outreachy-2016
:date: 2015-11-27
:lang: en
:url: shweta-oak-kinto-2016
:summary:
    Work on Kinto project - making instances discoverable, during internship.

.. epigraph::
	
  By having a program targeted specifically towards women, we found that we
  reached talented and passionate participants, who were uncertain about how to
  start otherwise.

  We are now expanding the program to people from more groups underrepresented
  in FOSS. We hope this effort will help many people learn how exciting, varied
  and valuable work on FOSS projects can be and how inclusive the community
  really is.

  -- `The GNOME Outreachy program wiki <https://wiki.gnome.org/Outreachy>`_

While looking for projects to contribute to, I read about Kinto, and found it intriguing.

The differences I observed between Kinto and such existing solutions are:

* ­Decentralized discovery of Kinto instances.
* It is open source and you can self host a kinto server which is not possible in other existing solutions.
* Fine grained permissions can be imposed on records, collections and buckets which follow a hierarchy.
* Kinto provides for Synchronization. Applications can synchronize data on different devices.
* Multiple clients can access a server in case of a shared resource.
* If an application makes some change, while offline, these changes will be reflected when connection is established.

Decentralization and Discovery 
===============================

The Kinto project aims to bring storage instances to everyone, attached to their Firefox Accounts. Currently, Kinto is thought of as a centralized server and everyone authenticates on one instance. Items are shared between users of a same instance. Scalability is harder when there is one endpoint, and it's also not easy to exchange and make use of information.
For instance, imagine Alice and Bob. Bob is using Mozilla's servers to store his data, whereas Alice deployed her own Kinto instance.

There are different use cases:

* Alice wants to use `Routina <https://github.com/leplatrem/routina>`_, an
  application that stores its data inside a Kinto instance. As such, Routina
  needs a way to discover where it should store its data, and send the requests
  to this server.
* Bob and Alice want to collaborate on a set of data (think about a webapp to
  manage their shared expenses). There should be a way for Alice to host
  everything and grant access to Bob on her data. The webapp should be able to
  use the correct server.

For discovery of kinto servers, we could use webfinger or hostmeta. 

Webfinger vs host meta
======================

Webfinger:

WebFinger is used to discover information about entities on the Internet that are identified by a URI using standard HTTP methods over a secure transport. A WebFinger resource returns a JSON object describing the entity that is queried.
 
The advantage of webfinger is that the Kinto server can be discovered from the scratch using just a self-hosted email address.
   


Hostmeta:

Hostmeta is a method for locating host metadata as well as information about individual resources controlled by the host.
With Host-Meta, the user will specify the location of the server serving the Host-Meta file, which will contain information such as where the Kinto server is, this also has the possibility of adding some other server locations.

In practice it would be easier to use a single account for FxA identity, and it's easier to configure the Kinto server in client/app settings than to have to create an FxA account from a self-hosted mailserver and then a  webfinger host. 

A possible solution
===================

It would be easier to discover and access a kinto server using Host-meta, the discovery of these servers can be implemented as follows: 
1. Let the user specify the location of its server on the client side
2. The client then does a lookup on the server to find the location of the Kinto server, using Host-Meta
3. It caches the location of the Kinto server and the location of the Host-Meta server until their is a problem connecting with the Kinto instance, in case it retries to get the information from the Host-Meta.
Creating the Host-Meta site is one of the primary tasks. We can do this by having the Host-Meta file generated statically by a script.

