Enabling Slack automatic updates on Debian and Ubuntu
#####################################################

:lang: en
:date: 2017-07-18
:url: slack-deb-automatic-updates
:summary: A little tip to enable automatic updates of Slack with Debian and Linux


Installing Slack on Linux
=========================

The proper way to install Slack is to download the installer for your
Operating System on the `Slack website <https://slack.com/downloads>`_.

However I realized my Slack client was not really up-to-date.

When installing Slack, a daily cronjob is installed automatically
which is supposed to configure the automatic updates.

However for some reason on my computer the cronjob while running never
installed anything.

It is only when I started to encounter problems with my Slack client
that I realized I had an outdated version.

How to verify if Slack is correctly configured?
===============================================

The configuration should create the following file: ``/etc/apt/sources.list.d/slack.list``

If this file is missing, you can use the following steps to install it manually.


Configuring APT for Slack updates
=================================

There is a tutorial and an automatic script that you can find here:
https://packagecloud.io/slacktechnologies/slack/install

But if you want to do it step by step, here is how to do it.

1. First add the `repository key <https://packagecloud.io/app/slacktechnologies/slack/gpg#gpg-apt>`_

.. code-block:: bash

    wget -O - https://packagecloud.io/slacktechnologies/slack/gpgkey  | sudo apt-key add -


2. Enter your password and you should see the following result.

.. code-block:: bash

    --201X-XX-XX XX:XX:28--  https://packagecloud.io/slacktechnologies/slack/gpgkey
    -                         100%[===================================>]   3,86K  --.-KB/s    in 0s 
    201X-XX-XX XX:XX:30 (59,8 MB/s) — [3954/3954]
    
    OK

3. Create the file **/etc/apt/sources.list.d/slack.list** with the following content

.. code-block:: bash

    deb https://packagecloud.io/slacktechnologies/slack/debian/ jessie main

4. Run ``sudo apt update``
5. Run ``sudo apt install slack-desktop``
6. That's it, Slack is now installed and will update itself automatically with APT.
