How to use the JavaScript spread operator with Webpack
######################################################

:lang: en
:date: 2018-02-01
:url: spread-operator-with-webpack
:summary: A trick to configure webpack so that it handles the spread operator.


What is the Object Rest Spread operator?
========================================

One of the cool feature of JavaScript is the `Object Rest Spread operator`_ feature:

.. code-block:: javascript

    const preferences = {...defaultPreferences, ...savedPreferences};

Before this feature you could write it like that:

.. code-block:: javascript

    const preferences = Object.assign({}, defaultPreferences, savedPreferences);

`Click here for more information`_ about this Object Rest Spread feature.

.. _`Object Rest Spread operator`: https://github.com/tc39/proposal-object-rest-spread
.. _`Click here for more information`: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Spread_operator

Because it is still a stage 3 draft feature, webpack doesn't
understand this operator yet and raise a ``Unexpected token`` parse
error.

How to enable the draft feature with webpack
============================================

Parse failed: Unexpected token
------------------------------

.. code-block:: javascript

    ERROR in ./src/background/storage.js
    Module parse failed: Unexpected token (54:28)
    You may need an appropriate loader to handle this file type.
    |       // set preferences defaults if not present
    |       if (!Object.keys(preferences).length) {
    |         preferences = {...defaultPreferences, ...savedPreferences};
    |       }
     @ ./src/background.js


Babel to the rescue
-------------------

The way to use experimental features in Javascript is to use Babel.

Hopefully for use there is a Babel plugin for this feature.

``babel-loader`` and ``babel-plugin-transform-object-rest-spread`` to the rescue
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: console

    npm install --save-dev babel-loader babel-plugin-transform-object-rest-spread

Configure webpack
-----------------

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      module: {
        loaders: [
          {
            test: /\.js$/,
            exclude: /node_modules/,
            loader: 'babel-loader',
            query: {
              plugins:[ 'transform-object-rest-spread' ]
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }


Conclusion
==========

This is a simple way to use this experimental feature with webpack.

Note that this will probably soon be unnecessary since webpack is
`implementing its support <https://github.com/webpack/webpack/issues/5548#issuecomment-362059410>`_
as we speak.
